# Silently Cancellable Votes

## Use Case

Voter faces threats of bribery and/or coercion.

### Summary of Solution

Allow a voter to _secretly_ notify an election admin their vote was corrupted, so the admin can silently cancel it from the election total. Admin also provides a Zero-knowledge Proof of Votes-Silently-Cancelled-Sum. This proves that the relevant voters consented, but not which voters.

This allows would-be victims of bribery or coercion to _trick_ their would-be compromiser, so that compromisers can't trust whether their attempt was successful or not. This is similar to current In-person voter privacy to defend against coercion or vote-buying attempts, based on similar uncertainty for compromisers.

### Context

SIV's proposed Anti-Vote-Selling Bounty Reward system, called [The Vote Seller's Dilemma](https://docs.siv.org/research-in-progress/vote-sellers-dilemma), is already intended to make it very difficult for would-be sellers to trust would-be buyers, and remains recommended as well.

This new Silently Cancellable Vote feature is meant for the reverse: to make it very difficult for would-be compromisers — whether through bribes or threats — to verify whether their attempt was successful.

It requires in-person voting infrastructure available alongside SIV.

The goal of this framework is to give SIV votes a similar level of defense against voter coercion as in-person voting currently holds.

### Key Risks to Solve For

1. The coercer should not be able to learn if the vote was cancelled.
2. The election admin must not be able to abuse this power, to secretly suppress votes.
3. Malware on voters' devices must not be able to abuse this power, to secretly suppress votes.

## Basic Idea

1. If a voter wants their vote Silently Cancelled, they visit an in-person polling location.
2. They tell the Official Poll Workers they'd like to Silently Cancel their SIV Vote, because it was corrupted by a 3rd-party.
   - The voter can but does not need to Cancel their entire ballot, and can selectively choose just the individual selections (columns) that are relevant.
3. The Poll Worker authenticates the voter, e.g using a government-issued photo ID, to ensure the silent canceller's identity.
4. The voter re-opens their SIV Voter Interface. The need to retrieve private vote values that went into encrypting their vote, to provide them to the Poll Worker.
   - These were generated by voter's device. Admins do not get them otherwise.
   - They are _not assumed_ to be unknown to would-be compromisers. The design keeps their use secret, even if compromisers know them.
   - Once received by the admin, they allow the admin to construct a ZK Proof of the total votes cancelled.

## Core ZK Function

**Voters** — who wish to secretly cancel their (coerced) votes, so they can cast new paper replacements — provide their private vote data in-person to the election admin.

The original published SIV vote totals remain unchanged. This new sum of secretly-cancelled votes is also published, and its numbers can be subtracted from the SIV total, for the "uncorrupted" total.

**Admin** can then create a zero-knowledge proof of the sum of all cancelled votes, to prove each cancellation was authorized by the individual voters' themselves, but without revealing to 3rd-party coercers or bribers which votes were cancelled.

Fundamentally, the admin is proving in zero-knowledge that:

1. the private vote data they were given correspond to unique public encrypted votes
2. and that they add up to the claimed sum

```ts
circom function generate_proof_of_secret_sum(
    public all_encrypted_votes, // { encrypted: hex_string, lock: hex_string }[]
    public claimed_sum_of_cancelled_votes_subset, // grouped sum, like { washington: integer, arnold: integer }
    public election_public_key, // { recipient: hex_string }
    private votes_to_secretly_cancel, // { plaintext: string like '4444-4444-4444:washington', encoded: hex_string, randomizer: bigint_string }[]
    public hashes_of_votes_to_cancel, // hash_string[]
    private admin_key, // bigint
    public hash_of_admin_key // string
) {
    let recalculated_sum = {}

    // Prep for elliptic curve math
    let recipient = RP.fromHex(election_public_key.recipient)

    // Prove admin secret key still hashes to a consistent value across batches
    // To prevent re-using votes multiple times
    assert hash(admin_key) === hash_of_admin_key

    // For each item in votes_to_secretly_sum,
    for (vote in votes_to_secretly_sum) {

        // First, the admin proves each private vote
        // corresponds to one of the public encrypted votes

        // Confirm the provided encoded point
        // does in fact map to the plaintext
        let encoded = RP.fromHex(vote.encoded)
        assert decode(encoded) === vote.plaintext

        // Confirm it does in fact hash into the input_hash
        // These hashes can be confirmed unique outside the circuit
        assert hashes_of_votes_to_cancel[i] === hash(vote.randomizer, vote.encoded, admin_private_key)

        // Then we recalculate the encrypted ciphertext using the Elliptic Curve ElGamal algorithm:
        // Encrypted = Encoded + (Recipient * randomizer)

        let encrypted = encoded.add(recipient.multiply(vote.randomizer))
        // We can skip "lock", because we're not decrypting,
        // just confirming the encoded value is present in the full set.

        assert encrypted in all_encrypted_votes
        // If we've made it this far, we've successfully proved
        // this private vote was in the set of public all_encrypted_votes

        // Now, we check if the vote adds up to the claimed sum
        let vote_content = vote.plaintext.slice(15) // First 15 chars are verification number
        recalculated_sum[vote_content] += 1
    }

    assert recalculated_sum === claimed_sum_of_cancelled_votes_subset
}
```

## WIP Development Notes

### Functions we still need in Circom:

(RP = Ristretto Point. Our current js implementation is coming from https://github.com/paulmillr/noble-ed25519 v1)

- [ ] RP.fromHex()
- [ ] decode()
- [x] Curve25519.add()
- [x] Curve25519.multiply()
- [ ] Check for cofactor-8 groups
- [x] assert ... in
  - Use Poseidon hash— ZK Friendly hash.
  - For inclusion proof.
  - Build merkle tree outside of circuit.
  - in circuit:
    - pass merkle root,
    - pass message, hash within circuit. that's a leaf.
    - hash up a level with it's neighbors, to get hash one level up.
      - repeat again until you get to root.
      - QED the message is present in the root.

### More notes from recent sessions:

#### For Ristretto in Circom, see:

- https://github.com/Electron-Labs/ed25519-circom
- https://medium.com/electron-labs/zk-ed25519-underlying-mathematics-8d4f64d9431b

#### for loops:

- can't use runtime parameterized lengths. Circuit needs pre-defined lengths, known at compile time.
- Solution: Run in batches, eg 20 at time. Then pad last batch. One ZK Sum for each batch. Sum-of-sums outside of circuit.

#### To test performance at compile time:

`snarkjs r1cs info`

- https://github.com/erhant/circomkit good framework for testing and performance

#### Useful circom overview (circom101) and common recipes (merkle tree, proving array distinct, sorted, poseidon hashing):

- https://circom.erhant.me/index.html
